SPEAKER 0
Ok. Hello everybody. Good afternoon. Uh So first of all our second homework, um first homeworks uh have been partially graded. Uh Maybe you got your grade, maybe you didn't. Um Those should be done. Hopefully this week. Um we have homework to quiz two. Um with this time around we have a slight problem on these um all but one vertex odd degree problems. Uh We mentioned it last time. Um I just want to say again, if you get the question wrong, you should just be able to try again and then you should get the fixed question and it should be working. Um Any of the questions that are incorrect, I will go in and fix the grade and uh I don't know, maybe at the end of the term you guys can give me a grade for all the quiz questions I got wrong. Um I think what I've learned. Uh Yeah, you have a question. It'll be changed retroactively. Yes. Yes. Um And if you don't see the grade change uh at the end of the week, just uh send me some email, I'll go in and figure out what went wrong. Uh I think I've gotten a lot better at manually fixing the grades. There's 100 and 83 of you. I think so. I've gotten quite efficient at going in and editing those grades and, and getting that done. Um, I, your question, I'm sorry, when you redo the quiz it should be. Um, there's two versions of the question, right. Uh, one of them, the graph is impossible and one of them, the solution doesn't work properly. What's that? Ok. I can't hear you. You get the impossible one. I don't, I don't think so. I'll have to go check, send me email if that's what you see, I'll see if I can fix it. You get zero. Yes, sir. Go. Ok. Well, send me some email. I'll check it out. Um These are so far, all of the questions with these problems are these questions I've been trying, which have a random number generator. So you all get slightly different numbers with the same theory behind it. And uh well, I think I'm just done with that. You guys are all going to get the same questions. Uh And hopefully from here on out, we'll have no more issues. Um And if I want to add those random number generations, I will master the quiz process first and then uh do that. Um Not for this class. Um Yeah, so I would say my rating of the quiz system so far bad, but not a total disaster. We'll see. There's still plenty of time for it to be a total disaster. Uh For now, I think it's ok and hope and things should improve progressively as I learn how to use the system and give you guys questions that actually work. Right. Um And as for that impossible graph question, I do have to admit embarrassingly, I did write that question, but I did spot it and then I deleted the wrong one. And then what happens is just like you guys, when you go to review the quiz, you only get back the questions you got wrong. Well, apparently I can't preview the quiz once I've answered all the questions. So I went in preview the questions when that one doesn't work, delete it out. But now I can't preview it anymore. OK? Well, you guys don't need to know that but a little bit about how bright space quiz system works. Uh Let's pick up where we left off from last time. We're looking at planar graphs. Now. Um we did do the Euler theorem, right, which is R is E minus V plus two. This is good for calculating the number of regions. Very often. We see the formula written this way, right? R minus E plus V equals two. I always just remember, look, regions are the biggest, right? They're two dimensional edges are smaller, they're one dimensional vertices are zero dimensional. So they kind of go in order, right, with the signs going plus minus plus minus. So personally, I find that one easier to remember, start with the regions and go plus minus plus minus. Um Where do we leave off? Uh Let's see. So you have some homework questions like this. Um These should be working. They all are right? The easiest questions you'll get this year. All right, you look at the number you plug, um you plug in the formula, right? We want to find out how many regions there would be. Well, we know the formula R is E minus V plus two, right. V. We know there's 10 vertices. E we don't know yet, right? But we do know the degrees of all the vertices. So we got to go back to our edge counting theorem, our handshaking lemma, right? We know that the sum of all the Greece of all the vertices must be twice the number of edges and some of all those for vertex degree as well, they're all equal to three. And we can see very easily E is what here? 15. And once we have that, we go plug it all in 15 minus 10 plus two. And that will give me seven regions. Yeah. Any questions there everyone can do. If you want to try and go draw this graph, draw it in the plane count the regions, you should get seven, right. We can use the formula for calculating not just the number of regions, but also for calculating the number of uh edges. If I know that I have six vertices in seven regions, I know R minus E plus V equals two. Right. V we know are we know E self E will be what R plus V minus two, which in this case is just seven plus six minus two, right? All there is to it. Little bit of algebra. Any question there everyone feels good with those problems, right? A little bit of algebra, a little bit of arithmetic. And sometimes we have to remember our edge counting theorem and that's all there is to it. OK. I do have some problems floating around like this. I do let these go on purpose, right? Seven vertices all degree three, right? No such graph, right? Handshaking lemma, odd number odd odd degree. Keep your eye out for those good we can do for six vertices all degree three. I don't know why I have so many of these. I think you guys are good. You guys are good on this. All right, don't need all those. Uh Do you want to do this one? Now, how many vertices and edges would there be in a plane graph that has six regions? And each region has four boundary edges? So you have an idea. Well, uh let's see, I have to calculate, I don't know the answer off the top of my head. Let's see. Uh we're gonna have eight, let's say for OK. I have to think each region with four boundary edges. 12. Yeah. Yeah, I get 12 and eight. Good, good. Sorry guys, I got a little bit of a cold, a little stuffy up here. That's uh so if we think about this right, we have a graph that has six regions and each region has four edges going around. But those edges, how many regions do those edges lie on? Hey, each edge is going to bound two regions. So if I have six regions, assuming we have a connected graph, right? Each one has four boundary edges, all right, we got our vertices here, right? These regions are all like squares. And uh let's see uh we have a problem we can't draw like this because that outside region needs to have four boundary edges. Also let's see what is the drawing supposed to look like outer region with four boundary edges, interior region with four boundary edges, interior region for boundary edges, something like this, right? 12345 and six. So we can kind of see right. How many edges do we have? Four? Four and four is 12? How many vertices do we have? Uh 2468? Yeah, but we can actually reason this out the same way we did on the last problem, right? Look at those edges. Each edge is on how many regions, two right, just like in edges on two vertices and edges also on two regions. So we had a theorem right. That the number of edges is um uh twice. The number of edges is the sum of all the vertex degrees. Why? Because if I count all the vertex degrees, then I count every edge twice. Well, if I count the number of boundary edges on each region, then I count every edge twice, right? So follow the same reasoning. Um By the way, we do call this the degree of the region. The degree of the region is the number of edges on it. Um I have that definition on the next slide, I think um we'll get to that in a moment, but we can right to E must be the sum of the degree of all of the regions which in this case will be four edges each times six regions, right? We can get the number of edges, we already know the number of regions, but R minus E plus V better equal two. Now, we know R we know E V we can solve, giving me finally V equal to uh what am I gonna get? Six minus 12 is minus six. Should give me eight. That makes sense to everybody. We actually have a nice theorem for this. Um Exactly, I don't think it has another name, right? It's exactly like the handshaking lemma, right? It's the handshaking lemma, but not on the graphs uh edges but on the regions. Any question there question that that's what I've just done over here, right? Don't have to draw it because we know that if I sum up the number of edges on each region, I better get twice uh twice the number of edges because each edge will be counted twice. It's exactly the same theorem as our handshaking lemma, right? Because just like each edge is on two vertices, each edge is also on two regions. Does that make sense? Then from here? Right. Once we know this is the rest is algebra, right, we use this theorem right. We have theorem here and then we have theorem here. It makes some sense. Have you have you find the uh yeah, the degree of the regions is just the number of edges on that region just like the degree of a vertex is the number of edges on that vertex. And so you can find out the bigger, well, we're told of the problem. Each region has four boundary edges. That's the same statement as saying each region has degree four. Have you got it now? Yeah, right. Each region has four edges, each region has degree four. Yes, it is on the next slide. So the degree of a region is just the number of edges that are on the boundary of that region. And we have a nice corollary to theorem 131, our handshaking uh edge counting theorem, which is that in any plane graph, the sum of the degrees of all the regions is twice the number of edges right, just like it is for vertices with one little asterisk caveat, which is that we've sort of assumed that all of those edges are on the boundaries of regions. What if we have an edge that's not on the boundary of a region? I'll show you an example really quick and I'll put one there, right. It's not true that edges are always on the boundary of region. We could have a dangly edge like this guy, right? He's not really on the boundary of a region. He's just hanging, he's hanging out, right. I always call him the the dangly edge, he just dangles. He doesn't uh he's not part of any circuit. So what do we do? We count him twice on the region that he's in, right? And so that would make the infinite region degree four for the four edges going around the outside, right. Our infinite region and our inside region would be degree six, right. 1234 for the edges going around and two for that dangly edge inside. Because the basis of the theorem is that each edge counts twice because it's on two regions. Well, if it's only on one region, we just make sure to count it twice on that region. And then the theorem still works. This isn't gonna come up very often. I just don't want to give you a theorem that's only partially true. All right. So I give you the theorem with the uh the weird exception that we count these dangly edges twice um on the region that they're in notice that I could have just as easily drawn that dangly edge on the outside, not on the inside, but it would really be the same graph, right? It would just be transposing the inside region with the outside region, right? The outside would have degree six, the inside would have degree four. Now again, this is not really gonna come up for you guys, but just in case you ever see this and to not give you a theorem that's uh only partially true, right? We cover all the cases. Any question on this makes sense? Excellent, right? And like I said, why do we count the edge twice on the region? Well, because we like this theorem. And so we count the edge twice on the region so that our theorem still works. Now, I'm going to give you a corollary to euler's formula. Uh This is a very useful one in any connected planar graph. The number of edges must be less than three times the number of vertices minus six. And I should, I, I think I should add a caveat to this which is like e greater than um or you should give a cave out to this, which is where I have more than one region. I think this doesn't work quite right, if you have just like a single edge in one region, but if there's more than one region. If I have a planar graph, this works. So you guys have seen this before, some of you. So OK, right now this is just an equation. Let me explain briefly why this works. And then we'll get into the proof. So let me draw a graph with some regions, right? We need our greater than one. So we need some regions. How many edges do I need to make a region? Three? Right? Three is the minimum, right? Two edges does not a region make, right, need one more to close that loop, right? And that's true, not just for this region but for every region. Right. Right, we could have a region that has more than four, more than three rather but not less than three. Right. So, so once I have two reasons, one thing I know, right, what, what can I say about the degrees of those regions right now that we know that these are not just one dangly edge with a region, right? That these, these regions are completely bounded by a circuit. What can I say about all of the regions of a plane? The degrees three or more? Right? Three is the minimum degree that uh that a region can have, right? Can't be less, you can't have a region of degree two. You can only if you have that special case, right where the graph has just one edge, then you get a region of degree two, right? But otherwise every region has degree of at least three. And now we know right, that if we know something about the degrees of the regions, then we know something about the number of edges. And that's, that's the gist of the proof. So let me bring up the proof here and we'll go through it as we have just shown if I add up the degrees of all of the regions, right, The minimum degree is three. And so every region must have a degree of at least three. And so if I add up all the degrees, that's at least three times the number of regions, everyone follow line one. Any questions there, I think everything follows from line one. Once you get line one good, once we know that, well, what is the sum of the degrees of all the regions? That's twice the number of edges, right? So we'll replace that the sum of the degrees of all the regions that's twice the number of edges that's great or equal to three R. We can solve out that E, right? Just algebra, right? We spelled out that E and then what do I know about R? Well, we have euler's formula, right? R is E minus V plus two. Once we make that substitution, we do some algebra you can verify on your paper, right? Um We subtract the E over and we multiply by something and we end up with E less or equal to three V minus six isn't that nice and terribly convenient. Now, one thing I love about this is there's no R in it because in order to talk about R, we have to have regions, in order to have regions, we have to have a plane graph, right? In order to have a plane graph, we have to have a planar graph, right? So I can talk about the planar of a graph without ever referring to the region. So I don't have to know if a graph is plainer in order to calculate this. That makes sense, right? All I need to know is the number of vertices, number of edges. I don't need to know if a graph is plain or anything to go check this. Now um The theorem is stated very clearly, right. This is an if not an if and only if right, this is an if so if G is a connected planar graph, then E is less or equal to three V minus six. Now we can safely conclude the contra posit right? That if E is greater than three V minus six, right? If the graph has too many edges, then G is not a connected play a graph. Does that make sense? Right. If this is violated, right. Which we can check it for any graph. We don't have to know planar. We don't have to drive the plane, we don't have to count any regions, right? Any graph we can check this. If E is too big, then we know it's not a connected planar graph. What does that mean? Well, assuming it's a graph, either it's not connected or it's not planar. If you know the graph is connected, you can safely conclude it's not planar, right? So if this is violated, we know right. If this is violated on a connected graph, we know that graph cannot be planar if it checks out if we have some graph and we count the edges and the vertices. And this equation holds right. This inequality holds then what can we conclude nothing, right? It doesn't say anything about the other, the other direction, right? So if this is violated, we know that we have not a planar graph, a nonplanar graph. But if it works, it doesn't really tell us anything right? There are there might be nonplanar graphs for which this inequality actually does hold right? This is gonna hold for every planar graph but it might hold for some nonplanar graphs as well. So again, just a tool in your toolbox, right? I ask you is a graph planer. I think you have a bunch on your homework, right? Is this graph planar. This is one of the tools you you can check this. So let's take a look at K five right? We kind of showed K five is nonplanar already by drawing it. But now we can make a real, a real satisfying proof right? Because sometimes those drawing proofs you go, well, I see that I can't draw it but how do I really prove it? But now we can really prove it. Right. K five is nonplanar. Well, how many edges are in K five? Let's start with the easy one. How many vertices are in K five? Right? Five. Anyone know how many edges 10? And by the end of this class, you won't have to calculate that right. You'll just know K 5, 10 edges K five comes up a lot. Now we can check right? E less or equal to three V minus six. I'll put a question mark. I'm not saying that's true. I'm checking it and we plug them in is 10 less or equal to three times five minus six. What is that? 15 minus six? Is nine? Is 10 less or equal to nine? No, no, I'm good at what number is bigger than what number? And that is definitely not bigger, right? And now we can safely conclude the K five is not planar. If it had worked, we would maybe not know for sure. Right. We need to do something else. Uh Let me show you guys an example. OK. I'll make a little aside here, right? We've done the proof for K five. But what about K 33? That's the other. Not right. K five and K 33. Those are nonplanar graphs. What about K 33? Right? Is E less or equal to three V minus six. Well, how many vertices are in K 336? How many edges? Nine? Right? Three times three is nine. Let's check is nine less or equal to three times six minus six. I'll put that question mark there because we're checking it nine less or equal to, right? Three times six minus six is two times six is nine lesser equal to 12. Yeah, actually that does, that checks out. But we know K 33 is not planar, right? So this does not help us, right? This can help us show that a graph is not planar, it won't help us show that it is. And if it holds the graph might still be non player. Yes. So if you know that a graph is no player

SPEAKER 1
and you show that it's still checked out, does that mean that they're not?

SPEAKER 0
Hm if it doesn't check out and you know, the graph is not plane or does that mean there's a K 33? I actually, I don't know, is it always K 33? I will have to think about that. My, my intuition says yes, but I don't know if I can say this definitively. Um Now what we see in this class is a lot of small graphs because you know, we're sort of doing this by hand and, and learning. But in reality, when you deal with large nonplanar graphs, very often they contain K five and K 33. And in that case, I don't know what would happen, I'd have to, I'd have to think about that. I'm not sure. Right. Everyone do with this. So now if only we had a tool, another tool that would help us with this K 33 problem and we do right. This, this theorem doesn't help us with K through three. But thankfully, we have another one, corollary number two, something else we can use. If G is, let me highlight here, a connected planar and bipartite graph, then we can actually establish a tighter bound e less or equal to two V minus four. And the proof goes basically the same way. So let's think about this before we get to the proof. If I have a connected planar bipartite graph, well, we know that let's assume regions bigger than one, right, not a one region. Uh example, let's assume that we have some boundary, some circuit making a boundary. What is the smallest number of edges? We can have to mark a region. All right. The last example, we said three, right, I can make a region with three. Why do you think three is not the answer anymore? It's bipartite right, bipartite graph cannot have odd circuits. So if you can have odd circuits, then it can't have circuits of size three, which means that every region must be bounded by at least four, right, make a note, right, need four edges to bound. So we just follow through the exact same reasoning only instead of each region being at least degree three, each region is at least degree four. And that gives us a nice tighter bound. So now the sum of my degrees must be at least four are, and the rest of this is algebra, it all goes the same way, right? Um The sum of the degrees is equal to two E we saw about that R that R is E minus V plus two euler's theorem. And then there we go. Yes, yes. It also, yes, you need at least two regions. You have the same problem, right? If I just have one edge, um I think even if you, even if you have two edges that still works, right? Because two edges in one region would give you a region of degree four, they'd be two dangly edges, they'd all count twice. So I'll say this holds for anything with more than one region. But actually, I think you can get even stronger. You can say this holds for anything with more than one edge. Good, any question there. Now, the same rule applies. This is still an if then and in theory, I don't know any example off the top of my head. But in theory, if this, if this works, the graph might be plainer, it might not, we don't know. But if it doesn't work, then it's not a connected plane or bipartite graph. If E is greater than to V minus four, then right by contra posit G is not a connected planer bipartite graph. Now, you need to understand from context, right? Is it not connected? Is it not plainer? Is it not bipartite? Is it not all three? Right? If you know the graph is connected and bipartite, then we can safely conclude nonplanar otherwise all we can conclude is that it's not all three, all right. So again, just the tool in your toolbox, right? If this might be a useful test, if you know that a graph is connected and planar and you want to check it for bipartite that might be useful. Right? Generally, we see this for a known bipartite graph that we want to check if it's plate and just to follow up K 33, I don't think there's anything um right, K 33, uh we already know E is uh V is six, E is nine, V is six, E is nine and we can check is E less or equal to two V minus four, is nine, less or equal to 26 minus four. And in fact, uh nine is not less than eight because I know what number is bigger than what number. And we can safely conclude since we know K three, we know K 33, we know it's connected, we know it's bipartite. Therefore, it can't be planar, right? And of course, extending this to larger graphs. Right? Before you start drawing in the plane, this is just an easy thing to check, right? If you violate the inequality, nonplanar done, if you don't violate the inequality, then we got some more checking to do good. And uh oh, all I have is uh just a rehash of what I've said, right? If E is greater than three V minus six, then it's not a connected plane or graph. Is it not connected or not plainer? That's what you have to figure out, right? If E is greater than two B minus four G is not a connected planar my apartheid graph, right? Is it not connected? Not planar, not bipartite? That's what you have to figure out if these inequalities are satisfied, then they didn't help us, right? They don't tell us much. You have a question. Um So the second one is right. If we violate this one, say E is greater than two V minus four, then it's not a connected planar bipartite graph, right? But if we don't know, maybe the graph is plainer but not bipartite, right? If we know the graph is bipartite, then we can use this to tell if it's planar. Does that make sense? And I would have to think to come up with an example. I don't have one handy, but it is certainly possible that there is a nonplanar graph right, that satisfies all of these, right? Otherwise the theorem wouldn't be stated this way, right. So it is possible to come up with a connected planar graph that satisfies a connected nonplanar graph that satisfies both of these. That's a fun problem for you guys to think about see if you can come up with one. If you do. I'd like to see it actually. All right. Um summary for section 1.4 we talked about planar graphs. How do we tell if a graph is planar or not? We do the circuit chord method. We check euler's formula and its corollaries. We can count the number of regions. And also we have Kurowski's theorem. That's going to be the big one on your next homework. Right. Next homework you're gonna get right here's some nonplanar graphs. You're gonna have to find those K fives and K three threes, right? We gotta find those uh configurations. OK? We got plenty of time left. So let's start to talk about um Oiler cycles. Now, this brings us to chapter two and we come for a full circle right back to where we began just to reiterate since about to use these words a whole lot. A path has no repeated vertices. A trail has no repeated edges, right? A circuit is like a path but it closes on itself. A cycle is like a trail, right? But closes on itself, it begins where it ends. Um And with the caveat that by the way, today, we're gonna talk about oiler cycles. Guess what if you look it up on Wikipedia. What's it called Oiler Circuit, right. The words are backwards in other books. And I'm pretty sure Wikipedia follows that standard. So I'm gonna follow the wording in our textbook because that's what's in our book and what's in our notes. We just remember if we look it up elsewhere, we might find the circuit and cycle definition switched. Ok. Right. Back to where we began. Right. Seven bridges through Koenigsberg, right? Can we walk over each bridge exactly once we know that we can't, right? But now we're going to get into really why we can't let me see what I have here, right? So these are the questions on our minds. Let me make the definition first. What we're looking for in this case is what we call the oiler cycle, right? We're looking for a cycle through the graph with no repeated edge, right? We don't cross any bridge twice and we want to cover all the edges, right? So that is exactly what we call the oiler cycle, right? It is a cycle that is no edges repeated and it traverses every edge. And so one of the things you guys will mix up, um when I see your writing is cycle versus oiler cycle, right? Anything that goes around in a cycle, right? That uh doesn't repeat any edges is a cycle in oiler cycle specifically covers every edge. So let's start by build some intuition. Look at some simple examples K five. Do we have an oiler cycle? Yes. In fact, there are many, in fact, K five is a great example here because, because the structure of K five, it's hard. You, you can't not find one, right. Just pick a vertex walk at random walk at random walk at random. Right. Not uh going back the way you came, right, walk at random walk at random random. I'm not thinking very hard. Right. Right. You start walking around, don't uh duplicate any edges. I mean, you can not find it. And so I'll just say yes and many, right? I mean, you just start somewhere, make whatever decision you want. Walk around, you're gonna find it. OK. How about this guy? Yes. Yeah. You see it, right? We gotta have two cycles here, right? We've got an outside cycle and an inside cycle and let me ask you guys, what did you find what you said it first? What did you find? Start at F good B go around all the way again and then, and then you go to the inside one, right? So making sure you start on the middle, right? We do the outside and then we do the inside. We could of course, start on a, do the inside first and then the outside. That would work too. In fact, we can switch from the inside to outside anywhere we want, we can start going around the outside. Maybe we get to hear then decide we want to do the inside, then go back and finish the outside, right. You do the same thing from the inside, right? Take those away. We can start on the inside, do one edge, then decide we want to do the outside. Right. Then I come back here now. Yeah, I, I can do whatever I want. I can then do the in, then do the rest of the inside and then finish it off. Let's see, I'm actually going to go off the top of my head. I'm pretty sure I can go inside outside, inside. Right. So I start on the inside. Then I do part of the outside, then I go back to the inside, then I go back to the outside again, then I go back to the inside again. So basically, so I want you to have this in your head, right? That there are these two circuits and how do we make the oiler circuit? Well, we're kind of going between the two circuits, right? We could do one first then the other, but there's other ways to do it. We can do part of one and then part of the other. Ok. How about this guy? All right. I've got a circuit around the outside, but then I can do one of those diagonals, but I can't get to the other one. Right? I can try to do it differently. Maybe I start on the diagonals but then I still have a problem. Right? I can go here. But then I can't get, I just can't get that last edge. Right. Right. No, on this one. So now we're getting to, what is, what is the difference? What is the thing that allows this to exist versus not, right? Why do I have one here? Right. But not here. Yes, that's it. Right. Look at the vertices. I think someone actually had this, right? Was it you sir? Someone over here had it on the first day of class too? Right here. I have these vertices have odd degree right over here. Auburn sees even and oh, let's take a look at this one. This is a good one. Bow tie case. Do, do, do what I use my highlighter highlighter is better, right? Do do do do do do, right? No problem. Again, we have two circuits, right? I've got a triangle on the left and a triangle on the right. Those are both circuits or uh cycles, right? Those are both cycles. Do do do do, do do and then what do I do? I could do one first and then the other or I do part of one and then the other and then I go back right. All there to see is even degree. And how about this one? I think it's the last one. Yeah. Uh oh Not the last one. OK. How about this one? This one? If you look, I had this one? Is from the textbook. Right now. We can look and see all vertices even degree. But can you find it? Yeah, I see it. There's a few ways to do it. Right. I think it's easy to go. OK, before we leave. H Right. Because if I leave, H, I won't be able to get back. I've got to do this one but then I'm pretty much free to kind of, uh, be careful. Don't go back to sea because we can't go there till the end. So it's not like some of the other examples we can wander around, however you want to be sure to find it, right? There's a few things we got to be careful of on this one, right? But we will get there. Although you ever do these things when you're a kid, like can you draw this picture without picking your pen up? Right? That's this right? You draw this picture without picking up your pen, right? That's what I'm doing. OK. So it's not always so easy, right? The K five was great. We could do whatever we wanted. We always found it here. We had to, we had to be careful at a couple of points. Um How this one? All right. Certainly not odd degree vertices. So what happens? Right? Let's say we start here arbitrarily, right? If there is a circuit, it doesn't matter where you start because a circuit is a circle, right? But let's go here. So I come to C and then I leave C I use two of the edges on C how many edges do you have? Left? One is we're looking for an oiler cycle. So we're gonna have to use that last inch. But what happens when we use that last edge, we can't get out, we get trapped. So if anything has degree one, obviously, we can't have an oiler cycle. Now, if we think about it as we build the oiler cycle, if something, every time we go through a vertex, the degree the usable edges on that vertex go down by two, right? Because we go in and then we go out. So every time we do that degree goes down by two. So anything that has odd degree will eventually become degree one, right? And eventually be a black hole, you'll, there'll be one way in and no way out and you'll get trapped there. The only place where that's OK is the starting vertex, right? Because when I leave, I leave one edge behind to close the circuit, right? But even still, that means even degree, right? Because I take one to go out and I leave behind one to come back. Did you have a question? Yeah. Right. I can try, but I'm gonna find myself in trouble. Right? Can't go there. And uh it is not just that I can't go there, but also I have to go there. Right? Because I have to include that edge, right? But I also can't because if I go there, I get trapped. Right? So no Wheeler cycle. Come on CYO I can spell. Yes, that's it. Right? If any vertex in the graph has odd degree. Right. So what about a graph that has one vertex of odd degree? To what? No such thing? Right. OK. I'm trying to trick you guys. Right? No such thing. One vertex I had to read is, but you could have two, right? That's the smallest number you can have and Yeah. Right. You might have 100 vertices of even degree and you're going around and around. No problem. But still you have those two odd degree vertices, right? You go through them every time you go through the vertex, it reduces by two. Eventually it has degree one, right? And then you can get in and can't get out but you still have the other one left to get to. No, you can't but you can have two. What? Yeah. Yeah. Um That vertex on the outside has to be one, one is o Yeah. What's, what's, what's your counterexample? So pretend you don't have CE and BF. So hold on, let me, let's, let's draw this, right? So we got this shape, the shape but we have only this diamond, right? No CE no BF. And who do you want to connect it to? Doesn't matter? Right? OK. Right. No oiler circuit, right? Odd degree odd degree. Yeah. Right now we have two odd degrees and it's always gonna be, now, this case is extreme, right? Because you get, you can't get out there and never come back. But if you have two odd degrees internally like this one, you're always gonna have one that you get stuck in and then the other one you still have to get back to. Yes. Ok. So what do you want? You want? Not with this one, but just c ce, right? Ce, same problem, right? I can come through here. But now what, where are you doing? Which way do I go? Right. Whichever way I go, I, I take one edge and I can't get to the other one. Right? And it's specifically, it's, it's two edges on an odd degree vertex, right? It's uh well, in this case, it's between odd degree vertex and getting back to the starting point, the starting guy, he kind of acts like an odd degree except you only have to come back to him at the end, right? Because you take one edge to go out and he's kind of odd, which means that you can get stuck in him at the end, but that's what you want, right? It's a, it's a cycle. So we wanna get stuck in the vertex that we started in good. Any other question on this one question? Is there a way that it's not, that's a good question. If so we know that if, right, So it seems intuitive. I think that if we have odd degree vertices, we can't have an oiler cycle. But if they're all even do, we always have one. That's the question. Right. That's the question. Right. The answer is yes, we always have one. But it's not intuitive. We have to prove it. Um There is, by the way, one more condition to have an oiler cycle. Right? It has to have all vertex's even degree. And do you know what the other condition might be? Yes, connected has to be connected, right. Disconnected graphs can do it. OK. So it must be connected, right? And it must be all even degrade. And I sort of been hinting at all the concepts we're gonna need for this proof. This is not an easy proof. It's a little tedious we'll get through it. Oh gee. OK. That's not good. Um So OK, let's do the theorem. Um So an oiler recycle exists if, right, I should say if and only if it is connected and all of our diseases have even degree. That is our theorem. Now, I had put a picture here just to serve as an example. Um since obviously my picture did not come out, right. Right. What we actually, what I actually have here is a copy of one of the graphs we did earlier. It's the one that looks something like this. I usually do blue for vertices and green for uh let's see those are now OK, let me, let me not make this up. Let me go. So the example I wanted to use for this proof was this one. So let me just uh copy this duplicate. One of these usually says, oh clone used to be called duplicate, they changed it on me. So let's come here and let's take away all of this. I want to give you a sort of visual representation of how this proof is gonna work. Now, remember what we did on K five, right? We were able to just kind of wander around and we couldn't miss it, right? We always end up in the oiler cycle, the oiler cycle. Now, for this one, there were some things to watch out for. So in order to con to construct this proof, we're going to do a proof by construction. So we're going to construct the oiler cycle, but we're gonna have to do this in a methodical way in a way that I can tell you what the steps are. I can't just say walk through all the vertices until you walk through until you hit all the edges and then come back to the beginning, right? Because we're, we're trying to prove that that's possible. So I need to do is give step by step instructions. Now the step by step instructions are gonna be just like K five. We're gonna pick a starting vertex and we're just gonna walk around randomly. We're gonna see what happens. Maybe we find the oiler cycle. Maybe we don't. But if we don't, we're going to have some way to fix it. So let's pick, let's pick. A, is the first letter of the alphabet. Why not start with a, and let's just walk around Willy nilly, not paying attention to those important things. Right. Maybe I just wa wander down this way and I wander this way and maybe I come around here and I don't, I don't remember to go find that triangle and I come this way and I end up back at a so I have constructed a cycle but not the oiler cycle, right? Because I missed some of those edges. Now, question is there anywhere else I could end up, could I end up anywhere? But a suppose I follow this technique of wander around the graph aimlessly with no particular rhyme or reason. Where could I possibly end up? Hm. But assuming you keep on going until you can't go anymore, how might I end up stuck in a vertex with nowhere to go? You can't, they had to, they had to have an odd degree. The only vertex that has an odd degree when we're not sitting on that vertex is the one we started with. Right? Because imagine, right. Ignore the highlight for a second. We start at a and now while I'm leaving a so I'm sitting on this edge now a has an odd degree but no one else does, right? Because I have not arrived at D yet and marked off that edge, right? So from this point, the only place I could ever end up with end up is a because when I get to D it has even degree. So I take one of the edges in, I take one of the edges out, right. I'll never be left with one edge behind. I might leave two edges behind or four edges behind or zero edges behind. For example, when I go through vertex N right, I leave zero edges behind. I've used them all right. But I don't have to go back to N I've used all the edges. So the only place I could end up with, the only place I could end up is a right and the only place I could end up is a and so this wander around randomly must create a cycle, right? It can't create anything else. Now, it might create the oiler cycle that would be lucky, but it might not, right. It might go like this, it might leave some edges behind. So what do you think we're gonna do? Yes, that's right. Um First of all, every vertex will have an even number of edges because I left, I also returned to everyone I entered, I also left, right. And so we still, it, the, the graph may not be connected anymore, but that's OK. It was connected at the beginning. That's what matters. It may not be connected anymore, but I just pick a new starting vertex. All the remaining vertices have even degree. And so the same rules apply, I can do it again. And so let's do it again, right? Pick a starting vertex. Let's start with C why not? OK. We wander, wander, wander, no choices, no choices, no choices, no choices, no choices, no choices. OK? We found another cycle now we haven't hit all the edges yet. So we have to do it again. And so we pick any vertex that's left and we wander, wander, wander. Um Let's do it in a different color. Let's get our blue one out, wander, wander wander. And so I've expressed this graph as three cycles. In this case, three in general, it could be one, it could be 100 it could be any number. But by the rules that we're following each time we do this, we must create a cycle. And so we're going to decompose the graph into cycles, right? There's some randomness in it, right? I don't tell you how to choose the edges, how to wander around. But it doesn't matter. You can always do it and you will always end up with a result that is a decomposition of the graph into cycles. Now, to complete the proof to show that we can always make an oiler cycle, we're going to assemble these into a single cycle. Now, do you remember along the way I was kind of pointing out like, well, we have this inside, we have these different cycles so we can kinda go from one to the other. That's what we're gonna do, right. These cycles, let's pick any two cycles. Um, let's, we'll pick anyone to start with, let's start with the green one. Now, the green cycle must intersect another cycle. How do I know it must intersect another cycle? Yes. Um, No, because that's actually true for every cycle, every cycle must intersect some other cycle, right? The purple one doesn't intersect the blue one, but every cycle intersects some other cycle cause it's connected, right? If I had a cycle that doesn't intersect any other cycle, then the graph must be disconnected, right? There's no way to, how would I get from a vertex on this cycle to a vertex on that cycle? How would I get right? To be connected? There must be a path. Where's that path? Right? It must be partly on one and partly on the other, right? And so there must be a vertex in common. So that's the idea here. So what am I gonna do? I'm going to pick one cycle to start with and I'm going to walk along it until I get to a vertex that's shared with another cycle, right? So let's say for example, I pick a and I start going down my green cycle. Now I arrive at what is that ad? Right? D is on green and purple. So what can we do from D, we can definitely go around the purple cycle right back to D and then we can continue the green cycle. Good. Now, I have a new cycle that's green plus purple. That cycle. If there's any right, that cycle must intersect the next one because it's connected. And so I do the same thing. So now I walk around green plus purple. Do do right. Right. I go a DC I, right, I go around purple, then I go around green and then when I get to that shared vertex, H then I walk around the blue one and then I finish the right. And so I take all those cycles and I, I glue them together at their shared vertices. That's the idea of the proof. Now, all we have to do is write it. OK. So this is how I've written it up, right? Given a connected graph G we'll start at some vertex A and then from A, we will trace out a trail, right? Any particular way we just keep on going and going until we can't go anymore. Each degree being even means we will never be forced to stop until we return to A. So we must return to A, this gives us a cycle C but not necessarily the oiler cycle, right? Everyone's with me so far. OK. Now I do it again with G prime, which is the graph G minus that cycle that I found. Right? I take all those edges. I used away, I pick a new starting point and I start again. Now I must have a common vertex between C and G prime. That is the graph where I'm finding the second cycle, right? So after I remove C from G, I have G prime left and they must share a vertex. So I'm gonna make sure to start on that shared vertex when I make the second cycle because we saw right, everyone connects to some, every cycle connects to some cycle. But it's possible, right? If I go back here just for a second, right? I could have done the green one first and then the blue one second and then the uh oh those do touch. OK. I could have done the purple one first and then the blue one second, right? And then they wouldn't touch. So what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna make sure to start on a vertex for my first cycle. So that way my first cycle and my second cycle will definitely be touching and then I can glue them together immediately. So this is how I constructed the proof, right? There must be a common vertex from the cycle I found to the remaining vertices. It start at the common vertex and build a new cycle C prime. Then I create a new circuit by following C from A to a prime, right? Following C from the starting vertex to some shared vertex with the new, with the other cycle. Then I do the second cycle. Then I finish the first cycle, right. So I follow C from A to a prime C prime, from a prime back to a prime, the whole cycle. And then following C again, from a prime back to A and then maybe we're done, maybe we have an oiler cycle if not repeat, right, the set of vertices that are left, right and then right repeat until no vertices remain right. So we repeat, where do we repeat from? Right. Right here. Right. I subtract my cycle from the whole graph to see that there's some vertices left. They must have some vertices in common. I started a common vertex, trace out another cycle. Then I glue it into the right. So I'm building the cycle from pieces as I go. This is an iterative process. You can always do it, you can follow the steps, right. And we've proven that right, when we trace out this trail, we always end up where we began. So we always get a cycle and we always have a vertex to start on to trace out the next cycle, right? As long as there's vertex remaining. All right. This one's pretty technical. You have a question. Oh It on the exam, it's like twice as long as this. No, I don't. I, I actually um um we have some time but I don't, I don't give proofs on the exam. Uh proofs are for the homework on the exam. What I'll give you is more like what you see on the quiz. Um But theoretical questions like um I won't say prove or give a counterexample. I might just say true or false or I might just say um which of the following are a valid theorem. So you still need to use your sort of proof like reasoning. But I think uh for short, the exams are like an hour and a half, right? How many proofs can I give you in an hour and a half? So, um I don't do proofs on the exam. I do some sh short answer questions. Instead, if you know your proofs, you should get the short answers. Good. Any questions on this? Good, everyone's OK with this. No questions, no questions. You need some time to digest it maybe. Oh Unfortunately, uh Stony Brook is having some problem with their file share server. You may notice um the last two lectures, I have the blank lectures, but not the ones from class. I have our lectures on a file share that I have at the lectern. But you've noticed I can't get cell service to log into bright space here and I can't get the files, share access on my computer where I have access to Bright space. Um I figured out a workaround to upload the lectures so I can upload the lectures through the virtual sync site um through the VNC, but I have not yet figured out how to download them to share them with you. I'll get that fixed as soon as I can. Yes. The code on the Duo app. Um Can you show me after class? Yeah. Um OK. We only have five minutes left. So let's do real quick. Uh Let's see. I think that's right. Or their cycles. Examples, right? Those are the easy ones, right? We already saw this one, right? No. OK. What do you guys think? Next one? No, next one now, right? Um I'll highlight these. Here's our degree threes. Uh Here's our degree threes. Here they are, right? Any two, even if there's one odd degree vertex there. Well, there's no such thing, right? OK. Uh How about this one? Yes. Um oh By the way, um do I have it on the original theorem? Um I didn't write it but it's it. Um I'll make a note for next time. Um This theorem for O cycles holds for multi graphs, right? This is not just for, for graphs. This holds for multi graphs. I believe it also holds for pseudo gras, although it's kind of silly to talk about cycles on a pseudograph because you can have a cycle to yourself. Uh So here we do have a multi graph, but this one works, right. Right. I draw without picking up my pen. OK. This one we know this one works great. And what was the last one? All right. Multi graph again. But this one works just fine. In fact, if it works, it almost doesn't matter what I do. I just have to be careful. I don't, um, cut off a whole cycle. Right. And if I do, I get back to the beginning and I go, oh, I cut off a cycle and then I glue the cycles together like we did in the proof. Ok. I think that's good for today. We'll pick up next time. We'll cover oiler trails. Right. Same idea. Hit all the edges. But, uh, we don't have to go back where we started. So, this is ok.
